📘 Execution Plans in SQL Server

🔹 1. Introduction

Execution plans are visual or textual representations of how SQL Server executes a query.
They help understand:

Which indexes are used

Join order and join type

Scan vs seek operations

Estimated vs actual number of rows

Cost distribution of query operations

Purpose: Optimize queries and improve performance.

🔹 2. Estimated Execution Plan vs Actual Execution Plan
Feature	Estimated Execution Plan	Actual Execution Plan
When generated	Before query execution	After query execution
Row counts	Based on statistics	Actual rows returned
Execution	No data retrieval	Retrieves data
Cost estimation	Shows estimated I/O and CPU cost	Shows actual I/O and CPU used
Use case	Query design & prediction	Query tuning and analysis
How to view	SET SHOWPLAN_ALL ON / Ctrl+L in SSMS	Include Actual Execution Plan (Ctrl+M)
🔹 3. How SQL Server Uses Execution Plans

Query Compilation

SQL Server generates a query plan from the T-SQL.

Uses statistics to estimate row counts and choose operations.

Query Optimization

Evaluates different strategies: Index Seek vs Scan, Join types (Nested Loop, Merge Join, Hash Join).

Chooses lowest estimated cost plan.

Query Execution

Actual execution may differ if statistics are outdated or data distribution differs.

🔹 4. Key Operators in Execution Plans
Operator	Description
Clustered Index Seek	Efficient lookup on clustered index
Nonclustered Index Seek	Lookup on nonclustered index
Clustered Index Scan	Reads entire clustered index
Table Scan	Reads entire table (heap)
Nested Loops Join	Iterative join for small datasets
Merge Join	Sorted join for large datasets
Hash Match Join	Hash-based join for large, unsorted datasets
Compute Scalar	Calculates expressions (e.g., totals, computed columns)
Key Lookup	Fetches columns not covered by nonclustered index
🔹 5. Viewing Execution Plans
5.1 Estimated Execution Plan
-- Method 1: SSMS toolbar button "Display Estimated Execution Plan"
-- Method 2: T-SQL
SET SHOWPLAN_ALL ON;
GO
SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE LastName = 'Smith';
GO
SET SHOWPLAN_ALL OFF;

5.2 Actual Execution Plan
-- Method 1: SSMS toolbar button "Include Actual Execution Plan"
-- Method 2: T-SQL
SET STATISTICS PROFILE ON;
GO
SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE LastName = 'Smith';
GO
SET STATISTICS PROFILE OFF;


Includes actual rows processed, execution order, and actual cost.

Critical for tuning performance.

🔹 6. Interpreting Execution Plans
6.1 Estimated vs Actual Row Counts

Compare EstimatedRows vs ActualRows

Large differences → indicates outdated or missing statistics

EstimatedRows = 1000
ActualRows = 100000


Solution: Update statistics, consider indexes.

6.2 Operators

Seek → good (selective lookup)

Scan → may be costly (consider indexing)

Nested Loops → good for small joins

Hash Match / Merge Join → good for large datasets, sorted/unsorted

🔹 7. Example 1: Simple SELECT
SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE Salary > 50000;


Estimated Execution Plan:

Nonclustered Index Seek on Salary

EstimatedRows: 1000

Actual Execution Plan:

Nonclustered Index Seek on Salary

ActualRows: 1200

✅ Shows optimizer chose appropriate index. Minor difference due to data distribution.

🔹 8. Example 2: JOIN Between Tables
SELECT e.FirstName, e.LastName, d.DepartmentName
FROM Employees e
JOIN Departments d ON e.DepartmentID = d.DepartmentID
WHERE d.Location = 'NY';


Estimated Plan:

Nested Loop Join

Index Seek on Departments (Location)

Index Seek on Employees (DepartmentID)

Actual Plan:

Shows actual rows per operator

Can detect skewed data causing performance issues

Optimization Tip:

If actual rows >> estimated → check statistics

Consider covering index or filtered index.

🔹 9. Best Practices for Execution Plans

Always compare Estimated vs Actual Plan for tuning.

Update statistics regularly to improve estimation accuracy.

Use Include Actual Execution Plan for complex queries.

Check for high-cost operators (Table Scan, Key Lookup).

Consider index improvements:

Covering indexes to avoid key lookups

Filtered indexes for selective queries

Look at parallelism indicators (for large queries).

🔹 10. Execution Plan Tips for Performance Tuning
Scenario	Action
Table Scan on large table	Add index, check filter
Key Lookup	Consider covering index
Nested Loops on large dataset	Consider Merge Join or Hash Join
EstimatedRows << ActualRows	Update statistics
High CPU cost operator	Optimize query logic, consider indexed views
🔹 11. Common Interview Questions
Question	Answer
Difference between Estimated & Actual Execution Plan	Estimated → before execution (no rows read), Actual → after execution (shows actual rows & cost)
Why compare estimated vs actual rows?	Detects outdated stats or skewed data affecting query plan
Key operators to look at	Seek, Scan, Nested Loops, Hash Join, Merge Join, Key Lookup
How to include execution plan in SSMS?	Ctrl+M for actual plan, Ctrl+L for estimated plan
How does statistics affect execution plan?	Optimizer uses stats to estimate rows and choose plan

🔹 12. Summary Table
Aspect	Estimated Plan	Actual Plan
Timing	Before execution	After execution
Rows	Estimated rows	Actual rows
Data Retrieval	No	Yes
Purpose	Query design, predict plan	Query tuning, identify bottlenecks
Accuracy	Based on statistics	Real execution metrics
Example Use	Check if query will use index	Check actual scan/seek and cost

✅ In Summary

Execution plans are critical for query performance analysis.

Estimated plans help predict behavior before running queries.

Actual plans show real execution metrics, highlighting potential issues.

Understanding and interpreting execution plans allows indexing, query rewriting, and statistics updates for optimal performance.
