📘 Index vs Partitioning vs Sharding in Databases
🔹 1. Introduction

Large databases require techniques to improve performance, manageability, and scalability.
Three commonly used approaches are:

Indexing – speeds up data retrieval.

Partitioning – divides a large table into smaller, manageable pieces within the same database.

Sharding – distributes data across multiple servers or databases for horizontal scaling.

🔹 2. Index
🧩 Definition

An index is a database object that improves query performance by providing fast access paths to data.

🧩 Key Points

Does not reduce the size of the table.

Speeds up SELECT, JOIN, WHERE, and ORDER BY.

Can be clustered (data physically sorted) or non-clustered (separate structure with pointers).

🧩 Example
-- Clustered Index on primary key
CREATE CLUSTERED INDEX IX_Employees_EmpID ON Employees(EmpID);

-- Non-clustered Index for frequent search
CREATE NONCLUSTERED INDEX IX_Employees_LastName ON Employees(LastName);


Use case: Querying employees by last name in a table with millions of records.

🔹 3. Partitioning
🧩 Definition

Partitioning divides a large table or index into smaller, manageable segments (partitions) based on a column, often a date or range.

Each partition can be stored separately.

Types of partitioning:

Range Partitioning → based on value ranges (e.g., dates)

List Partitioning → based on discrete values (e.g., regions)

Hash Partitioning → based on a hash function (for even distribution)

Composite / Multi-level Partitioning → combination

🧩 Benefits

Improves query performance by partition elimination.

Easier maintenance (backup, archive, load).

Parallel processing possible.

🧩 Example: Range Partitioning
CREATE PARTITION FUNCTION pf_OrderDateRange (DATE)
AS RANGE LEFT FOR VALUES ('2023-12-31', '2024-12-31');

CREATE PARTITION SCHEME ps_OrderDateRange
AS PARTITION pf_OrderDateRange ALL TO ([PRIMARY]);

CREATE TABLE Orders (
    OrderID INT,
    CustomerID INT,
    OrderDate DATE,
    Amount DECIMAL(10,2)
) ON ps_OrderDateRange(OrderDate);


Query example:

SELECT * FROM Orders
WHERE OrderDate BETWEEN '2024-01-01' AND '2024-06-30';


SQL Server scans only relevant partitions → faster.

🔹 4. Sharding
🧩 Definition

Sharding is horizontal partitioning across multiple database servers.
Each shard contains a subset of rows for better scalability.

Unlike partitioning (same server), sharding spreads data across servers.

Used in distributed systems for very large datasets.

🧩 Benefits

Handles massive datasets that cannot fit on one server.

Reduces I/O and contention.

Supports horizontal scaling.

🧩 Example: Sharding by CustomerID

Database cluster with 3 shards:

Shard1 → CustomerID 1–100000

Shard2 → CustomerID 100001–200000

Shard3 → CustomerID 200001–300000

SELECT * FROM Customers
WHERE CustomerID = 150000;  -- Routed to Shard2


Query routing is usually handled by application layer or middleware.

🔹 5. Comparison Table: Index vs Partitioning vs Sharding
Feature	Index	Partitioning	Sharding
Purpose	Improve query speed	Manage large tables, faster query & maintenance	Scale horizontally across servers
Data Movement	No	Within same database / filegroup	Across multiple servers/databases
Storage	Index pages stored on disk	Partitioned segments on disk	Each shard has its own database
Query Performance	Faster lookup/search	Partition elimination reduces scan	Queries routed to relevant shard
Maintenance	Rebuild/Reorganize	Backup/restore per partition	Independent shard maintenance
Complexity	Low	Medium	High
Scalability	Limited	Moderate	High
Example	IX_Employees_LastName	Orders partitioned by OrderDate	Customers database split by CustomerID range
🔹 6. When to Use What
Scenario	Recommended Approach
Frequent search/filter on columns	Index
Large table (> millions of rows) within one server	Partitioning
Very large dataset that exceeds single server capacity	Sharding
Fast reporting on recent data	Partitioning with clustered index
Global application with distributed users	Sharding
🔹 7. Real-World Examples
Example 1 – Index
-- Lookup employee by last name
SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE LastName = 'Smith';


Non-clustered index on LastName → Index Seek → fast retrieval.

Example 2 – Partitioning
-- Query recent orders
SELECT * FROM Orders WHERE OrderDate >= '2024-01-01';


Orders table partitioned by year → only scans 2024 partition → fast query.

Example 3 – Sharding

E-commerce platform splits user data:

US users → shard1

EU users → shard2

Query for US user routed to shard1 database → horizontal scaling achieved.

🔹 8. Key Notes for IT Professionals

Indexes

Low-level optimization.

Works on a single table.

Improves SELECT performance.

Partitioning

Logical horizontal split of large table.

Helps in backup, archiving, partition elimination.

Within same server / database.

Sharding

Horizontal scaling across servers.

High complexity, requires routing logic.

Used for very large distributed systems.

🔹 9. Performance Tips

Index → Use covering, filtered, or composite indexes for frequently queried columns.

Partitioning → Choose partition key wisely (e.g., date, region). Combine with clustered index for query efficiency.

Sharding → Balance shard data evenly, consider shard key that minimizes cross-shard queries.

🔹 10. Interview Quick Reference
Question	Answer
Difference between index, partitioning, sharding	Index → speeds search; Partitioning → splits table on same DB; Sharding → splits table across DBs
Can a table have both index and partitioning?	Yes, partitioned table can have indexes per partition
Sharding vs Partitioning	Sharding → horizontal across servers; Partitioning → horizontal within DB
Best use case for index	Fast lookup / search / joins
Best use case for partitioning	Large tables within one server
Best use case for sharding	Very large distributed systems

✅ In Summary

Index → speeds up data retrieval in a table.

Partitioning → splits large tables for easier maintenance and faster query within the same database.

Sharding → horizontal scaling across multiple servers for massive datasets.

Combine techniques as needed: partitioned table with indexes → improved query performance; sharded system with local indexes → scalable.
