📘 Partitioned Tables & Indexes
🔹 1. Introduction

Partitioning is the process of dividing a large database table or index into smaller, more manageable pieces (partitions), while keeping them logically as a single object.

Improves performance, maintenance, and manageability.

Commonly used in large databases or data warehousing systems.

Allows SQL Server to query or maintain data subsets efficiently.

🔹 2. Key Concept

Partitioning does not change the logical structure of the table or index.
To the user or application, the table looks like a single table — but internally, SQL Server stores its data in multiple partitions.

Each partition can be stored:

On a separate filegroup

Across different physical disks

🔹 3. Types of Partitioning
Type	Description
Horizontal Partitioning	Divides a table by rows (based on key values)
Vertical Partitioning	Divides a table by columns (rare in SQL Server, used for optimization)

👉 In SQL Server, when we say “partitioning”, we usually mean horizontal partitioning.

🔹 4. Why Use Partitioning?
Benefit	Description
Performance	Queries can scan only relevant partitions instead of the full table.
Maintenance	Easier backup, restore, or load operations per partition.
Data Management	Archiving or purging data becomes simpler (e.g., drop old partition).
Parallelism	Improves performance by allowing SQL Server to work on multiple partitions simultaneously.
Index Maintenance	Rebuild or reorganize index partitions individually.
🔹 5. Key Components of Partitioning
Component	Purpose
Partition Function	Defines how data is divided — maps column values to partitions.
Partition Scheme	Maps partitions to filegroups (storage locations).
Partition Key	The column used to determine the partition (e.g., OrderDate).
🔹 6. Example: Creating a Partitioned Table

Let’s walk through a practical example.

🧩 Step 1: Create Filegroups
ALTER DATABASE SalesDB ADD FILEGROUP FG_2019;
ALTER DATABASE SalesDB ADD FILEGROUP FG_2020;
ALTER DATABASE SalesDB ADD FILEGROUP FG_2021;

🧩 Step 2: Create Files for Each Filegroup
ALTER DATABASE SalesDB 
ADD FILE (NAME = Sales2019, FILENAME = 'D:\Data\Sales2019.ndf') TO FILEGROUP FG_2019;

ALTER DATABASE SalesDB 
ADD FILE (NAME = Sales2020, FILENAME = 'D:\Data\Sales2020.ndf') TO FILEGROUP FG_2020;

ALTER DATABASE SalesDB 
ADD FILE (NAME = Sales2021, FILENAME = 'D:\Data\Sales2021.ndf') TO FILEGROUP FG_2021;

🧩 Step 3: Create a Partition Function

Partition function defines how values map to partitions.

CREATE PARTITION FUNCTION pfSalesRange (INT)
AS RANGE LEFT FOR VALUES (2019, 2020, 2021);


Here, values <=2019 go to Partition 1,
values <=2020 go to Partition 2,
values <=2021 go to Partition 3,
and values >2021 go to Partition 4.

🧩 Step 4: Create a Partition Scheme

Partition scheme defines where (which filegroup) each partition’s data is stored.

CREATE PARTITION SCHEME psSalesScheme
AS PARTITION pfSalesRange
TO (FG_2019, FG_2020, FG_2021, [PRIMARY]);

🧩 Step 5: Create a Partitioned Table
CREATE TABLE Sales
(
    SaleID INT IDENTITY(1,1),
    SaleYear INT,
    Amount MONEY
)
ON psSalesScheme (SaleYear);


The partition key is SaleYear.

Data is automatically placed in the corresponding filegroup.

🧩 Step 6: Insert Sample Data
INSERT INTO Sales (SaleYear, Amount)
VALUES (2019, 1000), (2020, 2000), (2021, 1500), (2022, 1200);


Each row is automatically stored in the appropriate partition.

🔹 7. Verifying Partition Distribution

You can check which partition each row belongs to:

SELECT $PARTITION.pfSalesRange(SaleYear) AS PartitionNumber, *
FROM Sales;

🔹 8. Partitioned Indexes

Indexes can also be partitioned — they follow the same partition scheme and function as the base table.

Example: Partitioned Clustered Index
CREATE CLUSTERED INDEX CIX_Sales_SaleYear
ON Sales(SaleYear)
ON psSalesScheme (SaleYear);


The clustered index (and thus the table itself) is partitioned.

Example: Partitioned Non-Clustered Index
CREATE NONCLUSTERED INDEX IX_Sales_Amount
ON Sales(Amount)
ON psSalesScheme (SaleYear);


Improves query performance while maintaining partition alignment.

🔹 9. Partition Switching

A powerful feature — move data between partitions and tables instantly without physically moving rows.

Example:

ALTER TABLE Sales SWITCH PARTITION 3 TO SalesArchive;


Moves partition 3 data (e.g., 2021) to another table.

Extremely fast because it’s metadata-only operation.

🔹 10. Managing Partitioned Tables
Operation	Description
Split Partition	Add a new boundary value → creates a new partition
Merge Partition	Combine two adjacent partitions
Switch Partition	Move data between partitions or tables
Truncate Partition	Delete data from a specific partition only
Rebuild Partition	Rebuild index for a specific partition (not entire table)
🔹 11. Best Practices

Choose partition key wisely — typically a date or ID used in range queries.

Keep partitions aligned (table and index share same partition function).

Don’t over-partition — too many partitions can degrade performance.

Use filegroups on separate disks for I/O optimization.

Periodically merge/split partitions for new data ranges.

Monitor partition statistics and query patterns.

Use partition switching for archiving or loading bulk data efficiently.

🔹 12. Advantages
Benefit	Description
Performance	Queries scan only relevant partitions.
Manageability	Easier backup, restore, index rebuilds per partition.
Scalability	Handle very large datasets efficiently.
Availability	Partition-level maintenance reduces downtime.
🔹 13. Disadvantages / Limitations
Limitation	Description
Complex setup	Requires defining functions and schemes manually.
Maintenance overhead	Need to manage partition boundaries and splits.
Limited improvement for small tables	Best for large datasets (millions+ rows).
Increased storage	Extra metadata and partition alignment overhead.
🔹 14. Real-World Use Cases

Large Fact Tables in Data Warehouses (e.g., Sales, Orders, Logs)

Time-Series Data (e.g., IoT, Financial Transactions)

Archival Tables (partition by year/month)

ETL Operations (fast load/unload using partition switching)

Index Maintenance on massive tables (partition-level rebuild)

🔹 15. Interview / Practical Notes
Question	Answer
What is partitioning?	Dividing large tables/indexes into smaller, manageable parts
Types of partitioning?	Horizontal (by rows), Vertical (by columns)
Components?	Partition Function, Partition Scheme, Partition Key
Benefits?	Improved performance, easy maintenance, scalability
What is partition switching?	Fast metadata operation to move data between partitions/tables
When not to use?	For small tables or systems with frequent single-row updates
What is aligned index?	Index that uses the same partition scheme/function as its table

✅ In Summary

Partitioning = Logical table split for performance and manageability.

Partition Function defines how → Partition Scheme defines where.

Use aligned partitioned indexes for optimal performance.

Great for large, read-heavy or time-based data.

Enables fast data management (archival, switching, maintenance).
